# The Acton Free Press

by Patrick Stitt

>We launch our little craft into the big ocean, and christen her the Free Press.... sail on, good ship!
_Caption_: Joseph Henry Hacking, founding publisher

And thus began the first issue of the _Acton Free Press_, an English language newspaper that began publishing on July 2nd, 1875. The paper was printed weekly, initially on Fridays, then Thursday mornings, and finally moving to Wednesdays in the 1970s. A side of the newssheet could be ready on a Saturday, while the final side would not be until the night before delivery! The paper’s location moved throughout the town from the Acton Post Office in 1875, Matthews Hall, above Hotchken's Bakery, the Adams family property at the corner of Mill and John, finally settling in modern plants during 1927 and 1959. A subscription cost of $1/year was set by Hacking, surging up to $4.00 in the 1960s, $7 for outside of Canada. The paper followed the format of many community newspapers, with "Neighbourhood News" for surrounding areas, Sunday school psalms, local poetry, ads for the leather industry, vital records and tax reminders. The founding publisher and editor was Joseph Henry Hacking.

Joseph Hacking was born March 2, 1837, one of 12 children to William, a painter, and Margaret, of Leeds, England and Limerick, Ireland, respectively. The earliest mention of his involvement in printing comes out of Detroit, circa 1864, where he is listed as a printer in the _Commercial Advertiser_ office. In 1866 Hacking publishes the _Listowel Banner_, selling it off in 1873, and the _Guelph Advertiser_ after it amalgamated with the _Mercury_, circa 1873. It was while here that he decided Acton was a prime spot for another paper. As to why this was, we can assume his father's purchase of an acre of land in 1855, where the post office (and future site of the paper) sits, may be related. Having been incorporated as a village in 1865, the 800 strong community of Acton would now have a 4 page paper of its own. Hacking wished to be clear regarding his paper's stance on politics from the outset, with this prospectus from the first issue. (1875: July 2nd, page 1)

>...the FREE PRESS shall not be devoted to the interest of any political party or faction; that it shall at all times, and under all circumstances, be free to discuss matters of public policy on their merits...

This philosophy would be openly continued by subsequent publishers with Mr. Hacking's departure and hand off of the paper to the Moore brothers and Mr. Galbraith in 1877. During this time, his Excelsior Printing House won awards for ornamental and letterpress work at the 1874 and 1875 Guelph Central Exhibition. Afterwards, Joseph went on to establish the _Clifford Arrow_, then returning to Guelph before heading west to Manitoba for a number of years. After the passing of his first wife while in Winnipeg, he relocated to Buffalo, married again and passed away April 18, 1895  at the age of 58. With a glowing obituary in the April 25, 1895 issue of the _Free Press_, Hacking was laid to rest in a family plot near Listowel, Fairview Cemetery in North Perth. 

The Moore brothers would begin the dynastic century of family publishing of the _Acton Free Press_ with Thomas Albert. Apprenticed to Hacking during the first years of the paper, T. Albert would leave soon after to become Moderator for the United Church of Canada, leaving his brother Henry Philip to take up the reins. An Actonian from birth, H. P. was born on October 18th, 1857 or 1858, marrying Harriet Speight (whose sister Lottie was married to Thomas Albert) at the age of 22. He would steward the newspaper through until his death in 1929, in the grand home called Moorecroft (corner of Frederick and Church Street) featuring a monumental stained-glass window of his hero, Charlemagne. Henry was well-known for his homemade birdhouses he gave to children, and having struck up a friendship with Sir Harry Brittain, founder of the Commonwealth Press Union, which to led to an exchanging of town coat of arms with England's Acton. He was a Police Magistrate for counties of Halton, Peel and Wellington, so dedicated to his position that the paper printed this during its 100th Anniversary issue.

>Another person remembers the time Magistrate [H. P.] Moore happened to look at his speedometer and was alarmed to notice he was going over the speed limit-likely 15 miles per hour. H. P. Moore meticulously fined himself, paid the fine promptly, and recorded the transaction in the next week's paper.
_Caption_: (1975: July 2nd, page 27)

Although both Joseph and Henry had strong stances on keeping the _Free Press_ from leaning towards any political party, they took part in petitioning the government in support of matters important to printers, Hacking for reduced duties of imported printing materials, and Moore for amending a statute regarding libel law.

Henry collaborated on _Acton's Early Years_, a book recounting the town's history through his column "The Old Man of the Big Clock Tower" with the next publisher of the _Free Press_, George Arlof Dills. Dills was born in 1893 in Port Dover, and like Moore's brother Albert, Dills apprenticed with Henry in 1909. He presided over the expansion of the _Free Press_' staff from 4 employees to 34 at the time of his death. In 1917 he installed the county's first Linotype machine to reduce the laborious setting of type by hand. The town's first Citizen of the Year in 1958, Dills was part of the Acton Council for 25 years. George would begin expanding his publishing empire with the _Canadian Champion_ in 1948. His accomplishments were recognized with the first Ontario Weekly Newspaper Association's Man Of The Year award in 1954. His passing in his 73rd year, January 13th of 1966, and his son David taking over with his wife Mary "Kay" Dills (1928 - 2015) as editor, marked all but three of the first 100 years of _Acton Free Press_ being in the hands of Moores and the Dills.

Sons David and Jim Dills continued the Dills newspapers, David leaving the navy and Jim finishing a Journalism degree at Ryerson. The _Georgetown Independent_ was established by them in 1973, and in 1978 decided to sell off the papers to Inland Publishing. Into the 1980s the paper was published by Don McDonald, with Gord Murray was editor, who replaced Hartley Coats, Coats then editing full-time for the _Independent_ after taking over for Mary Dills when she retired in 1978. Hartley had been apprenticed as a printer's devil to the G. A. Dills in 1944.

The paper historically served the communities of Eden Mills, Rockwood, Nassagaweya, Acton, Georgetown, Milton, Everton, Ospringe, Campbellville, Limehouse, Ballinafad, Silvercreek, Erin Village, Glen Williams, Moffat, Churchill, Ebenezer and Silverwood. The _Free Press_ ran until eventually merging with the _Independent_, now publishing as the _Independent & Free Press_.

__Publication Dates__

1875: July 2nd - 1984: December 26th

__Frequency__

Weekly/Regular; 1875: Thursdays, 1967: Wednesdays
